# Conclusions

Inflation is one of the most crucial topics of economic theory, and there are multiple arguments on its causes and effects. However, it remains as an open debate. What generates inflation? Is it a persistent phenomenon? How responsive is it to current events? Does it impact all countries the same way? In this paper, I analyse the persistence, determinants and dynamics of inflation regimes for 2020-2022 on six Latin American countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica and Mexico.
I first define inflation shift time series and compute a Hidden Markov Model to uncover inflationary regimes and test their persistence. Then, I select a set of economic elements grouped into five main categories: monetary policy, international factors, demand-pull, cost-push and inflation expectations, and describe the methodology I use to test their influence. Finally, I analyse the determinants and dynamics of inflation for 2020-2022.
The results indicate that inflation determinants are highly heterogeneous and time-varying. Furthermore, inflationary regimes are strongly persistent; that is, if a country is in a specific regime, it is very likely that it stays in such way the next period. Nevertheless, Argentina generates a different result: only decelerating and high accelerating inflation regimes display persistence.
The monetary and international factors are the most relevant determinants of inflation for the period. Specifically, US inflation shifts have strong effects in Latin America, and are the main component in Argentina. It also shows that inflation determinants are markedly heterogeneous between countries: Costa Rica’s inflation is highly influenced by policy-related interest rates, whereas private consumption is crucial in Chile and Mexico. On the other hand, increases in producer prices drive most shifts in Brazil and Colombia. There are also episodes in which the determinants display considerably higher values than average, such as exchange rate in Mexico in 2020 and money supply and inflation expectations in Brazil and Costa Rica, respectively, in 2022.